README.md, before:

# README

Yusong's nix config.

## References

- [An unofficial book for beginners](https://nixos-and-flakes.thiscute.world/).
- [Home Manager Option Search](https://home-manager-options.extranix.com/).
- [the-nix-way/dev-templates](https://github.com/the-nix-way/dev-templates).

## Showcase

![neovim-zellij](./assets/neovim-zellij.webp)

## Structure

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  flake(flake.nix)
  h_base(base)
  h_desktop(desktop)
  h_linux_wsl(linux-wsl)
  h_linux_server(linux-server)
  h_linux_desktop(linux-desktop)
  h_darwin_desktop(darwin-desktop)

  o_linux_wsl(linux-wsl)
  o_linux_server(linux-server)
  o_linux_desktop(linux-desktop)
  o_darwin_desktop(darwin-desktop)
  o_default(default)

  flake --> o_default

  subgraph outputs/
    o_default --> o_linux_desktop
    o_default --> o_linux_wsl
    o_default --> o_linux_server
    o_default --> o_darwin_desktop
  end

  subgraph home/
    o_linux_desktop -.-> h_linux_desktop
    o_linux_wsl -.-> h_linux_wsl
    o_linux_server -.-> h_linux_server
    o_darwin_desktop -.-> h_darwin_desktop

    h_linux_server --> h_base
    h_desktop --> h_base
    h_linux_desktop --> h_desktop
    h_linux_wsl --> h_desktop
    h_darwin_desktop --> h_desktop
  end
```

## Get Started

### NixOS-WSL

Download `nixos-wsl.tar.gz` from the [latest release](https://github.com/nix-community/NixOS-WSL/releases).

<details><summary>Install WSL and run NixOS with the default configuration.</summary>

```sh
# make sure wsl feature is enabled
wsl --install --no-distribution

# import the tarball into WSL
wsl --import [Distro] [InstallLocation] [FileName]
# for example run the following command
wsl --import NixOS ~/NixOS/ path/to/nixos-wsl.tar.gz

# now you can run NixOS
wsl -d NixOS
```

</details>

Follow the instructions
[How to change the username](https://nix-community.github.io/NixOS-WSL/how-to/change-username.html)
to change username.

<details><summary>Pull this repository and apply the configurations.</summary>

```sh
# generate ssh key pairs
cd ~ && ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 2048
# add pub key to github user settings...

# enter a shell environment with git command included
nix shell --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" nixpkgs#git
# clone this repo under user home directory
git clone git@github.com:whisperpine/nix-config.git
# back up the original /etc/nixos
sudo mv /etc/nixos /etc/nixos.bak
# create a symlink to /etc/nixos
sudo ln -s ~/nix-config /etc/nixos
# create .env file from template
cd ~/nix-config && cp example.env .env
# edit .env (follow the comment inside)
vim .env
# tada
sudo nixos-rebuild switch
```

</details>

### Nix-Darwin

<details><summary>Install nix and apply configurations.</summary>

```sh
# install nix
curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
# generate ssh key pairs, add pub key to github user settings...

# clone this repo under ~/.config
mkdir -p ~/.config && cd ~/.config
git clone git@github.com:whisperpine/nix-config.git

# create .env file from template
cd ~/.config/nix-config && cp example.env .env
# edit .env (follow the comment inside)
vim .env

# tada
nix --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" \
  run nix-darwin -- switch --flake ~/.config/nix-config

# now darwin-rebuild is available
darwin-rebuild switch --flake ~/nix-config
```

</details>

Tip: `darwin-help` will open an HTML version of the man-page in the default browser.\
`man 5 configuration.nix` will open the manual of nix-darwin right in the terminal.

## Secrets

Secrets are managed by [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix),
which is based on [sops](https://github.com/getsops/sops).\
Considering [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) is used,
make sure *~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt* exists.

```sh
# decrypt and edit the encrypted file
sops secrets/encrypted.yaml
```

Commit message:

feat: apply symlinks on neovim config files
So that it's not required to `nixos-rebuild switch` after any changes in
the neovim configurations. It takes effect immediately, which can save
huge amount of time when modifications happen frequently.

"config.lib.file.mkOutOfStoreSymlink"

README.md, after:

# README

Yusong's nix config.

## References

- [An unofficial book for beginners](https://nixos-and-flakes.thiscute.world/).
- [Home Manager Option Search](https://home-manager-options.extranix.com/).
- [the-nix-way/dev-templates](https://github.com/the-nix-way/dev-templates).

## Showcase

![neovim-zellij](./assets/neovim-zellij.webp)

## Structure

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  flake(flake.nix)
  h_base(base)
  h_desktop(desktop)
  h_linux_wsl(linux-wsl)
  h_linux_server(linux-server)
  h_linux_desktop(linux-desktop)
  h_darwin_desktop(darwin-desktop)

  o_linux_wsl(linux-wsl)
  o_linux_server(linux-server)
  o_linux_desktop(linux-desktop)
  o_darwin_desktop(darwin-desktop)
  o_default(default)

  flake --> o_default

  subgraph outputs/
    o_default --> o_linux_desktop
    o_default --> o_linux_wsl
    o_default --> o_linux_server
    o_default --> o_darwin_desktop
  end

  subgraph home/
    o_linux_desktop -.-> h_linux_desktop
    o_linux_wsl -.-> h_linux_wsl
    o_linux_server -.-> h_linux_server
    o_darwin_desktop -.-> h_darwin_desktop

    h_linux_server --> h_base
    h_desktop --> h_base
    h_linux_desktop --> h_desktop
    h_linux_wsl --> h_desktop
    h_darwin_desktop --> h_desktop
  end
```

## Get Started

> [!NOTE]
> This repo must be cloned right under user's home directory (`~`). This is
> required to achieve symlink via `config.lib.file.mkOutOfStoreSymlink` with
> write permission, which is a time savor for rapid changes in neovim
> configurations. Refer to the comments of `nvimPath` in
> [./home/nvim/default.nix](./home/nvim/default.nix) for more details.

### NixOS-WSL

Download `nixos-wsl.tar.gz` from the [latest release](https://github.com/nix-community/NixOS-WSL/releases).

<details><summary>Install WSL and run NixOS with the default configuration.</summary>

```sh
# make sure wsl feature is enabled
wsl --install --no-distribution

# import the tarball into WSL
wsl --import [Distro] [InstallLocation] [FileName]
# for example run the following command
wsl --import NixOS ~/NixOS/ path/to/nixos-wsl.tar.gz

# now you can run NixOS
wsl -d NixOS
```

</details>

Follow the instructions
[How to change the username](https://nix-community.github.io/NixOS-WSL/how-to/change-username.html)
to change username.

<details><summary>Pull this repository and apply the configurations.</summary>

```sh
# generate ssh key pairs
cd ~ && ssh-keygen -t rsa -b 2048
# add pub key to github user settings...

# enter a shell environment with git command included
nix shell --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" nixpkgs#git
# clone this repo under user home directory
git clone git@github.com:whisperpine/nix-config.git
# back up the original /etc/nixos
sudo mv /etc/nixos /etc/nixos.bak
# create a symlink to /etc/nixos
sudo ln -s ~/nix-config /etc/nixos
# create .env file from template
cd ~/nix-config && cp example.env .env
# edit .env (follow the comment inside)
vim .env
# tada
sudo nixos-rebuild switch
```

</details>

### Nix-Darwin

<details><summary>Install nix and apply configurations.</summary>

```sh
# install nix
curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
# generate ssh key pairs, add pub key to github user settings...

# clone this repo under user home directory
cd ~ && git clone git@github.com:whisperpine/nix-config.git

# create .env file from template
cd ~/.config/nix-config && cp example.env .env
# edit .env (follow the comment inside)
vim .env

# tada
nix --extra-experimental-features "nix-command flakes" \
  run nix-darwin -- switch --flake ~/.config/nix-config

# now darwin-rebuild is available
darwin-rebuild switch --flake ~/nix-config
```

</details>

Tip: `darwin-help` will open an HTML version of the man-page in the default browser.\
`man 5 configuration.nix` will open the manual of nix-darwin right in the terminal.

## Secrets

Secrets are managed by [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix),
which is based on [sops](https://github.com/getsops/sops).\
Considering [age](https://github.com/FiloSottile/age) is used,
make sure *~/.config/sops/age/keys.txt* exists.

```sh
# decrypt and edit the encrypted file
sops secrets/encrypted.yaml
```
